# Abstract type definitions

    These enable a new data type to be defined by data type abstraction from
    an existing type.  We give the classic example, that of defining `stack`
    as an abstract data type (here based on lists)
            abstype stack *
            with empty::stack *
                 push::*->stack *->stack *
                 isempty::stack *->bool
                 top::stack *->*
                 pop::stack *->stack *

            stack * == [*]
            empty = []
            push a x = a:x
            isempty x = x=[]
            top (a:x) = a
            pop (a:x) = x

    The information given after  `with`  is  called  the  signature  of  the
    abstract  type - the definitions of the identifiers in the signature are
    called the `implementation equations` (these are the six equations given
    above).   Outside  of  the implementation equations the information that
    stacks are implemented as lists is not available  -  []  and  empty  for
    example  are incomparable objects of two different and unrelated types (
    [*] and stack * respectively).  Only inside the implementation equations
    are   the   abstract  objects  treated  as  being  equivalent  to  their
    representations.

    The implementation equations do not have to appear immediately after the
    corresponding  abstype  declaration  -  they  can  occur anywhere in the
    script.  For readability, however, it is strongly recommended  that  the
    implementation   equations   appear   immediately   after   the  abstype
    declaration.

    Note  that  in  Miranda  there  is  no  runtime  cost  associated   with
    administering  an  abstract data type.  The responsibility for enforcing
    the distinction between stacks and lists,  for  example,  is  discharged
    entirely   at   compile   time  (by  the  type  checker).   The  runtime
    representation of a stack does not require any extra bits to distinguish
    it  from  a  list.   As  a  result the Miranda programmer can freely use
    abstract data types to structure his programs without incurring any loss
    of efficiency by doing so.

    Notice that the mechanism used  to  introduce  abstract  data  types  in
    Miranda  does  not  depend  on  the  hiding  of identifiers, and in this
    respect differs from the traditional approach.  A fuller  discussion  of
    the Miranda abstype mechanism can be found in [*Turner 85].

    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    (*) D.  A.  Turner ``Miranda:  A  Non-Strict  Functional  Language  with
    Polymorphic   Types'',   Proceedings   IFIP   Conference  on  Functional
    Programming  Languages  and  Computer   Architecture,   Nancy,   France,
    September 1985 (Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 201, pp
    1-16).
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The print representation of abstract objects
     ("advanced feature" - omit on first reading)

    Values  belonging  to an abstract type are not in general printable.  If
    the value of a command-level expression  is  of  such  a  type  it  will
    normally print simply as

    <abstract ob>

    This is because the special function show (which is actually a family of
    functions, see elsewhere) has no  general  method  for  converting  such
    objects to a printable form.  It is possible to extend the definition of
    show to include the ability to print members of an abstract type,  using
    some appropriate format.  The convention for doing this is to include in
    the definition of the abstract type a function with the  name  `showfoo`
    (where `foo` is the name of the abstract type involved).

    We illustrate how this is done taking `stack` as the  example.   Suppose
    we  decide we wish stacks to print - using a syntax such that the output
    could be read back in (e.g. by readvals - see elsewhere) to generate the
    same stack.

     empty is to print as "empty"
     push 1 empty is to print as "(push 1 empty)"
     and so on.

    Note that we decide to fully parenthesise the output for safety -  since
    we  do  not  know  the  larger  context in which our stack output may be
    embedded.

    Because  `stack`  is  a  polymorphic abstraction, showstack will need to
    take as a parameter the appropriate show function for the  element  type
    (which  is num in the above examples, but could have been any type).  We
    add to the signature of stack the following function.

         showstack::(*->[char])->stack *->[char]

    To obtain the output format illustrated above, an appropriate definition
    of showstack would be,

        showstack f [] = "empty"
        showstack f (a:x) = "(push " ++ f a ++ " " ++ showstack f x ++ ")"

    If this definition is included in the script, stacks  become  printable,
    using  the  specified  format.  The effect is to extend the behaviour of
    the special built-in function  show  to  handle  stacks,  and  all  data
    structures  built using stacks (such as list of tree of stacks, stack of
    stacks and so on).

    The general rule is as follows.  Let `foo` be an abstract type name.  To
    make foo's printable, we need to define a `showfoo` thus:

            if foo is a simple type (not polymorphic)
            showfoo :: foo -> [char]

            if foo is polymorphic in one type variable (foo *)
            showfoo :: (*->[char]) -> foo * -> [char]

            if foo is polymorphic in two type variables (foo * **)
            showfoo :: (*->[char]) -> (**->[char]) -> foo * ** -> [char]

    and so on.  Note  that  the  show  function  must  be  declared  in  the
    signature  of  the  abstract  type, and that the name of the function is
    significant - if we change its name from  `showfoo'  to  `gobbledegook`,
    its  definition  will cease to have any effect on the behaviour of show.
    It also needs to have the right type, and if  it  does  not,  again  its
    presence  will have no effect on the behaviour of show (in this case the
    compiler prints a warning message).

    [Note on library directives: If you %export an abstract type,  foo  say,
    to  another  file,  it  is not necessary to %export the showfoo function
    explicitly to preserve the correct printing behaviour - if  an  abstract
    type  comes  into  existence  with  a show function in its signature the
    compiler will `remember` how to print objects of the type even in scopes
    where the show function has no name.]
