# Show

The use of `show` for converting objects to their print representations

The need often arises to convert an arbitrary Miranda value to its
printable representation as a string. For numbers the function
`shownum` (of type num-\>\[char\]) can be used for this purpose. To be
able to do this conversion for any type of object would seemingly
require an infinite number of functions, one for each type. As a
solution to this problem Miranda provides a special keyword,
`show`.

For any object x

            show x

is a string containing the printable representation of x. For example,
if x is a number the above expression is equivalent to `shownum x`. In
the general case, however, x could be a structured object of arbitrary
complexity. Note that show is a reserved word, not an
identifier.

In fact `show` behaves under most circumstances as
though it was the name of a function, of type `*->[char]`. For example
it can be passed as a parameter, so that say,

            map show [a,b,c,d,e]

is a legal expression of type \[\[char\]\].

There are three important restrictions on the universality of
show.

\(i\) You cannot `show` functions in any useful sense. (That would be
a violation of referential transparency.) The result of applying
show to any kind of function is just the string
\"\<function\>\".

\(ii\) You cannot `show` an abstract object unless an appropriate
show-function was included when the type was defined (see manual section
on Abstract types). The result of applying show to such an
object is by default just the string \"\<abstract ob\>\".

\(iii\) When it occurs in a script the context in which
show is used must be such as to determine its type
[monomorphically]{.underline}. An example:

            my_show x = "hello\n"++show x++"goodbye\n"

In the absence of any other type information, the compiler will infer
that my_show has type \*-\>\[char\], and that x is of type `\*`. The
use of show is therefore polymorphic, and will be rejected
as illegal.

If however we intend that my_show will be used only on objects of type
`tree`, say, and we add to the script the declaration
`my_show::tree-\>\[char\]`, then the above use of show
becomes monomorphic, and will be accepted.

The essence of restriction (iii) is that show is not a
true polymorphic function of type \*-\>\[char\], but rather a family of
monomorphic functions with the types T-\>\[char\] for each possible
monotype T. The context must be sufficient for the compiler to determine
which member of the family is required.

(For technical reasons this restriction applies only in scripts. In
command-level expressions show behaves as if it were a
genuine polymorphic function.)
