# Literate Scripts

    > || Literate scripts (an alternative comment convention)

    The standard comment convention for Miranda  scripts  is  that  anything
    rightwards from a pair of vertical bars to the end of a line is taken to
    be comment and ignored by the compiler, thus
            ||This is a comment

    Everything else in the script is taken to be formal  program  text.   An
    inverted  style  of  commenting is also available in Miranda, permitting
    the construction  of  a  "literate  script"  (the  name  is  taken  from
    Professor Donald Knuth's idea of "literate programming").  In a literate
    script EVERYTHING is assumed to be comment, except for lines marked with
    the formalising symbol '>' in column 1.  For example the following lines

    >  fac 0 = 1
    >  fac (n+1) = (n+1)*fac n

    would  be  taken  as  formal program text - and could be preceded and/or
    followed by some narrative explaining what the factorial function is and
    why we define it in this way.

    To minimise the danger that you will accidentally omit the '>" from  one
    line of your formal text without the compiler noticing that something is
    wrong, the following additional rule applies to Miranda literate scripts
    -  whenever  a  group  of  lines  of  formal program text is preceded or
    followed by some lines of "narrative", the two types  of  text  must  be
    separated  by  at least one blank line.  You will see that this has been
    done for the definition of  factorial  given  above.   (Definition  -  a
    "blank line" is one containing only white space.)

    Within the formal sections of a literate  script  the  standard  comment
    convention still works.  For example

    >  result = sum [fac n | n <- [1..50]]  ||NB this is a large number!

    The  compiler  takes  a  decision on which comment convention applies by
    looking at the first line of a script.  If this has a '>' in  column  1,
    then  it  is  a  literate script, otherwise the compiler assumes it is a
    conventional script.  Typically the first line of a literate script will
    just be a comment, eg

    > ||This is a literate script

    In fact this manual section is a legal Miranda  script,  defining  `fac`
    and  `result`  (see  first line). 

    An alternative convention is based on the name of the  file  -  if  this
    ends   in  `.lit.m`  then  it  is  assumed  to  be  a  literate  script,
    independently of the form of the first line.  This makes it possible  to
    have literate scripts which begin in `narrative` mode.

    As an aid to maintaining good layout in literate scripts, a simple  text
    formatting  program, called `just` (short for justify), is supplied with
    the Miranda system.  This leaves untouched the formal  sections  of  the
    script  and formats the narrative parts to specified width (default 72).
    If you use `vi' to edit your scripts note that the `just` program can be
    called from within the editor by saying, e.g.
            :1,$!just
    [Warning - do NOT use `just` on non-literate scripts,  it  will  make  a
    mess of them!]

    There is a UNIX manual page  for  `just`  which  gives  details  of  its
    behaviour  - to see the manual page from within Miranda say `!man just`.
    Note that `just` is a general purpose text formatting tool, and  is  not
    in any way Miranda-specific.

    As an additional aid  to  the  use  of  document  preparation  tools  in
    conjunction  with  Miranda  scripts, the Miranda compiler will recognise
    underlined keywords.  This applies both to reserved words, such as `div`
    and  `mod'  and  to  directives  such  as  `%export` (underlining of the
    initial  `%`  is  optional).   The  style  of  underlining  accepted  is
    `backspace-underline-character`  as  generated  by nroff/troff.  It will
    also recognise the underlined symbols > and &lt; as being equivalent to >=,
    <=  respectively.  This works in both literate scripts and scripts using
    the standard comment convention.

    Note on %insert and literate scripts
     An %insert directive in a literate script will be effective provided it
    occurs  in a line beginning with `>` (otherwise it is a comment and will
    be ignored).  The inserted text may itself use either  the  standard  or
    the  literate  comment  convention  (decided by the name of the file and
    whether or not its first line begins with '>').

    Similarly, text %inserted into a non-literate script may use either  the
    standard  or  the literate comment convention (again decided by the name
    of the file and the form of its first line).

    Using LaTeX with Miranda literate scripts
     Because of the `.lit.m` convention it is possible for a file to be both
    a  Miranda  script and a LaTeX source file.  In such a case the sections
    of formal Miranda text (recognised by the Miranda compiler by the `>` in
    column 1) will be surrounded by the LaTeX commands
     \begin{verbatim}

     \end{verbatim}
     A similar arrangement can be made for troff.

    This works fine - but you may wish to do even better, and have  reserved
    words  in  the  Miranda  text  underlined in your printed document.  The
    program `mtotex' takes  a  `.m`  file  containing  an  ordinary  Miranda
    literate  script,  and  creates a `.tex` file of the same name, in which
    various LaTeX  commands  have  been  inserted,  including  to  underline
    reserved  words  in program text.  See UNIX manual page for `mtotex` for
    details.  Note that the `.tex` file created by mtotex is  not  itself  a
    legal Miranda script.

    Acknowledgements
     The '>' inverse-comment convention (and the "blank line" rule) are  due
    to  Richard  Bird  and  Philip  Wadler  of Oxford University Programming
    Research Group, and were first used in  their  language  "Orwell".   The
    `mtotex` program was supplied by John Cupitt of the University of Kent.
