# Programming Style Guidelines

    Functional programming is still at an early  stage  of  development  and
    some  heterogenity  of  programming  style  is therefore inevitable (and
    desirable).  Nevertheless a certain amount is known,  and  there  is  no
    need  for  every  newcomer to functional programming to discover all the
    pitfalls by trial and  error.   We  give  here  a  series  of  suggested
    guidelines for good programming style in Miranda.  The list is not meant
    to be exhaustive.

    These rules are also not intended to be followed rigidly in  all  cases,
    regardless  of  conflicting  considerations.   That is why they are only
    suggestions for good style and not grammar rules. 

    Avoid the indiscriminate use of recursion
      A Miranda script that consists of large number of functions which call
    each  other  in  an apparently random fashion is no easier to understand
    than, say, a piece of FORTRAN code which is written as a rat's  nest  of
    GOTO  statements.  An excessive reliance on recursion (especially mutual
    recursion) can be an indication  of  a  weak  programming  style.   Some
    pointers:

    Use  list  comprehensions,  `..`  lists,  and  library   functions,   in
    preference  to  ad-hoc recursion.  For example it is probably clearer to
    define factorial by writing
            fac n = product[1..n]

    than to define it from first principles, as
            fac 0 = 1
            fac (n+1) = (n+1) * fac n

    and  to  define  the  cartesian  product  of  two  lists   by   a   list
    comprehension, thus
            cp x y = [(a,b)|a<-x;b<-y]

    is certainly a lot clearer than the recursive definition,
            cp (a:x) y = f y ++ cp x y
                         where
                         f (b:y) = (a,b): f y
                         f [] = []
            cp [] y = []

    The standard environment contains a number  of  useful  list  processing
    functions  (eg  map filter reverse foldr foldl) with whose properties it
    is worth becoming familiar.  They capture common patterns  of  recursion
    over  lists, and can often be used to simplify your code, and reduce the
    reliance on `ad-hoc` recursion.  Programs using list comprehensions  and
    standard  functions  are  also  likely  to  run  faster  (on the current
    implementation) than equivalent programs using ad-hoc recursion.

    The standard environment is only a basic collection  of  useful  general
    purpose  functions.   As you get used to programming in Miranda you will
    probably begin to discover other useful functions  that  express  common
    patterns  of  recursion (perhaps over data structures other than lists).
    It is a good practice to collect such functions in  libraries  (together
    with  some explanations of their properties) so that you can reuse them,
    and share them with others.  Not all of them will survive  the  test  of
    time, but it cannot hurt to experiment.

    To cause the definitions from such a library to be in scope  in  another
    script  you  would  use  a  `%include`  directive (see manual section on
    library directives).

    Avoid unnecessary nesting of definitions
     Scripts  that  get  deeply  nested  in  where-clauses  are  harder   to
    understand,  harder  to  reason about formally, harder to debug (because
    functions defined inside where's cannot be exercised seperately)  slower
    to compile, and generally more difficult to work with.

    A  well  structured  script  will  consist  of  a  series  of  top-level
    definitions,  each  of which (if it carries a where-clause at all) has a
    fairly small number of local definitions.  A third level  of  definition
    (where inside where) should be used only very occasionally.  [And if you
    find yourself  getting  nested  four  and  five  levels  deep  in  block
    structure you can be pretty sure that your program has gone badly out of
    control.]

    A function should normally be placed inside a where clause only if it is
    logically  necessary to do so (which will be the case when it has a free
    variable which is not in scope  outside  the  where  clause).   If  your
    script consists, of say six functions, one of which solves a problem and
    the other five of which are auxiliary to it, it is probably not  a  good
    style  to put the five subsidiary functions inside a where clause of the
    main one.  It is usually better to make all six top  level  definitions,
    with the important one written first, say.

    There are several reasons for this.  First that  it  makes  the  program
    easier  to read, since it consists of six separate chunks of information
    rather than one big one.  Second that the  program  is  much  easier  to
    debug,  because  each  of  its functions can be exercised separately, on
    appropriate test data,  within  a  Miranda  session.   Third  that  this
    program structure is more robust for future development - for example if
    we later wish to add a second `main` function that  solves  a  different
    problem  by  using  the same five auxiliary functions in another way, we
    can do so without having to restructure any existing code.

    There is a temptation to use `where` to hide  information  that  is  not
    relevant at top-level.  This may be misguided (especially if it leads to
    code with large and complex where-clauses).  If you don't  wish  all  of
    your  functions  or  data  structures  to be "visible" from outside, the
    proper way to do this is to include a `%export` directive in the script.

    Note also that (in the current implementation) functions defined  inside
    a  "where" clause cannot have their types explicitly specified.  This is
    a further reason to avoid putting structure inside a where  clause  that
    does not logically have to be there.

    Specify the types of top level identifiers
     The Milner  type  discipline  is  an  impressive  advance  in  compiler
    technology.   It  is  also  a  trap  for  the unwary.  The fact that the
    Miranda compiler will accept several hundred lines  of  code  without  a
    single  type  specification,  and  correctly  infer the types of all the
    identifiers does NOT mean that it is sensible to write code with no type
    information.   (Compare:  compilers will also accept large programs with
    no comments in, but that doesn't make such programs sensible.)

    For other than fairly small scripts  it  is  good  style  to  insert  an
    explicit  specification  of  the  type of any top level identifier whose
    type  is  not  immediately   apparent   from   its   definition.    Type
    specifications look like this
            ack::num->num->num
    says that `ack` is a function taking two numbers and returning a number.
    A type specification can occur anywhere in a script,  either  before  or
    after  the  definition of the corresponding identifier, but common sense
    suggests that the best place for it is  just  before  the  corresponding
    definition.   

    If in doubt it is always better to put in a type specification  than  to
    leave it out.  The compiler may not need this extra type information but
    human  beings  definitely  do.   The  extra  type  information   becomes
    particularly important when your code reaches the level of complexity at
    which you start to make type errors.

    If your script contains a type error it is unreasonable  to  expect  the
    compiler to correctly locate the real source of the error in the absence
    of explicit type declarations.  A type error means  different  parts  of
    your  code are inconsistent with one another in their use of identifiers
    - if you have not given the compiler any information about the  intended
    use  of  an  identifier,  you  cannot expect it to know which of several
    conflicting uses are the `wrong` ones.  In such a case it can only  tell
    you  that  something  is  wrong, and indicate the line on which it first
    deduced an inconsistency - which may be many lines later than the `real`
    error.   Explicit  type  declarations  make it much more likely that the
    compiler will spot the `real  error`  on  the  line  where  it  actually
    occurs.

    Code containing explicit type information is  also  incomparably  easier
    for other people to read.

    Use safe layout
     This is a point to do with the operation of the offside  rule.   It  is
    most  easily  explained  by means of an example.  Consider the following
    definition, here assumed to be part of a larger script

            hippo = (rhino - swan)/piglet
                    where
                    piglet = 17
                    rhino = 63
                    swan = 29

    Some time after writing this we  carry  out  a  global  edit  to  expand
    `hippo' to `hippopotamus`.  The definition now looks like this.

            hippopotamus = (rhino - swan)/piglet
                    where
                    piglet = 17
                    rhino = 63
                    swan = 29

    the where-clause has become offside, and the definition will  no  longer
    compile.   Worse,  it is possible (with a little ingenuity) to construct
    examples of layout where changing the length of an identifier will  move
    a  definition  from  one  level  of scope to another, so that the script
    still  compiles  but  now  has  a  different  meaning!!!   Replacing  an
    identifier by a shorter one can cause similar difficulties with layout.

    The layout of the `hippo` definition was unsafe, because  the  level  of
    indentation  depended on the length of an identifier.  There are several
    possible styles of `safe` layout.  The basic rule to follow is:

            Whenever a right hand side goes on for more than one line
            (because it consists of a set of guarded  cases, or because it
            carries a where clause, or just because it is an expression too
            big to fit on one line), you should take a newline BEFORE
            starting the rhs, and indent by some standard amount (not
            depending on the width of the lhs).

    There are two main styles of safe layout, depending on whether you  take
    the  newline  before  or  after the `=` of the definition.  Here are two
    possible safe layouts for the `hippo` definition

            hippo = 
                (rhino - swan)/piglet
                where
                piglet = 17
                rhino = 63
                swan = 29

            hippo 
              = (rhino - swan)/piglet
                where
                piglet = 17
                rhino = 63
                swan = 29

    The reason that either style can be  used  is  that  the  boundary,  for
    offside  purposes,  of  a right hand side, is set by the first symbol of
    the rhs itself, and not by the preceding `=` sign.

    Both of these layouts  have  the  property  that  the  parse  cannot  be
    affected  by  edits  which alter the lengths of one or more identifiers.
    Either of these layout styles also have the  advantage  that  successive
    levels of indentation can move to the right by a fixed step - this makes
    code easier to read and lessens the danger that your layout  will  `fall
    off'  the  right  hand  edge  of  the screen (although if you follow the
    advice given earlier about avoiding deeply nested block  structure  this
    is in any case unlikely to be a problem).

    It would be convenient if there was a program for  reformatting  Miranda
    scripts with a standard layout.  Apart from ensuring that the layout was
    `safe` in the above sense, it might make it easier for  people  to  read
    each  other's  code.   A  layout program of this kind may be provided in
    later releases of the system.

    Acknowledgement: The `hippopotamus` example (and the problem  of  unsafe
    layout) was first pointed out by Mark Longley of the University of Kent.

    Write order independent code
     When defining functions by pattern matching it is best (except in a few
    cases  where it leads to real clumsiness of expression) to make sure the
    patterns are mutually exclusive, so it does not matter in what order the
    cases are written.

    For the same reason it is better style to use sets of guards  which  are
    composed   of  mutually  exclusive  boolean  expressions.   The  keyword
    `otherwise` sometimes helps to make this less painful.

    By way of illustration of some of the issues here is a  good  definition
    of  a  function  `merge`  which combines two already sorted lists into a
    single sorted result, eliminating duplicates in the process
            merge [] y = y
            merge (a:x) [] = (a:x)
            merge (a:x) (b:y)
              =  a:merge x (b:y), if a<b
              =  b:merge (a:x) y, if a>b
              =  a:merge x y, if a=b

    First note the use of  mutually  exclusive  sets  of  patterns  (it  was
    tempting  to write `merge x [] = x` as the second case, but the above is
    probably better style).  Note also that we didn't use `otherwise` as the
    last  guard here because it would have spoiled the symmetry of the three
    tests.

    A related issue to these is that where  a  function  is  not  everywhere
    defined  on its argument type, it is good practice to insert an explicit
    error  case.   For  example  the  definition  given  in   the   standard
    environment for `hd`, the function which extracts the first element of a
    list, is
            hd (a:x) = a
            hd [] = error "hd []"

    Of course if a function is applied to an argument for which no  equation
    has  been  given, the Miranda system will print an error message anyway,
    but one advantage of putting in an explicit call to `error` is that  the
    programmer  gets  control  of the error message.  The other (and perhaps
    main) advantage  is  that  for  someone  else  reading  the  script,  it
    explicitly  documents  the  fact  that  a certain use of the function is
    considered an error.
